In a [TED talk][ted] in 2016, Linus Torvalds was asked to explain his notion of "taste". As an
illustration he showcases code as is typically taught in universities:

```c
void remove_list_entry(node **head, node *entry)
{
	node *prev, *walk;

	prev = NULL;
	walk = *head;

	// Walk the list

	while (walk != entry) {
		prev = walk;
		walk = walk->next;
	}

	// Remove the entry by updating the
	// head or the previous entry

	if (!prev)
		*head = entry->next;
	else
		prev->next = entry->next;
}
```

In contrast, he provides an alternative that he considers superior:

```c
void remove_list_entry(node **head, node *entry)
{
	node **indirect;

	// The "indirect" pointer points to the
	// *address* of the thing we'll update

	indirect = head;

	// Walk the list, looking for the thing that
	// points to the entry we want to remove

	while ((*indirect) != entry)
		indirect = &(*indirect)->next;

	// ... and just remove it
	*indirect = entry->next;
}
```

He argues that the important part isn't the details of the code—although details are also important,
but that by looking at the code in a different way it can be greately improved.

Taste isn't something that can be taught: either you have it, or you don't. And it takes somebody
with good taste (like Linus Torvalds), to recognize another person with good taste. However, by
immersing yourself with examples of good taste, eventually you'll absorb that style.

Here we'll dive into this illustration, and why it is considered good taste.

## Linked list

Anyone who has studied computer science in university at some point was asked to create a linked
list, which is one of the most basic data structures.

The core of a linked linked list is a `node`, which is a structure consisting of two fileds: a
value and a pointer to the next node.

<canvas id="node"></canvas>

```c
struct node {
	int value;
	struct node *next;
};
```

A linked list is nothing more than a sequence of nodes:

<canvas id="list"></canvas>

`head` points to the first node, and the last node's `next` pointer doesn't point to anything
(`NULL`).

So to get the second node's value (`1`), we could do this:

```c
head->next->value;
```

## Traditional code

To remove an element we need to make the previous element point to the next element, effectively
skipping the element we want to remove. Since we don't have a pointer to the previous element, we
need to traverse the list until we find the element we want to remove, and the previous element will
be the last element traversed.

So, a naive implementation would be like:

```c
walk = *head;

// Walk the list

while (walk != entry) {
	prev = walk;
	walk = walk->next;
}

// Remove the entry by updating the previous entry

prev->next = entry->next;
```

<canvas id="traditional"></canvas>

The moment `walk` is equal to `entry` we have found the node we want to remove, therefore `prev` is
the previous node.

All we have to do is update the previous node's `next` ponter to the current node's `next` pointer
(`0` points to `2`).

The problem is that when `entry` is the very first node, there is no `prev`, so this program would
either produce undefined behavior or crash.

To fix this all we have to do is add a check to deal with the corner case:

```c
if (!prev)
	*head = entry->next;
else
	prev->next = entry->next;
```

Now the code works properly (if you initialize `prev` to `NULL`), and that's where most programmers
would call it a day. "It compiles, ship it!"

But good programmers wouldn't stop there. It's not enough that the code compiles and runs correctly,
there's many other considerations: efficiency, readability, maintainability, style, etc.

Let's consider more.

## Refactoring code

The first step in refactoring code is ensuring the code keeps working in the same way as before, so
we need to write tests.

Let's write a very simple unit test:

```c
int do_test(void)
{
	node *head;
	node a = { .value = 0 };
	node b = { .value = 1 };
	node c = { .value = 2 };

	head = &a;
	a.next = &b;
	b.next = &c;

	remove_list_entry(&head, &b);
	if (a.next != &c) return false;

	remove_list_entry(&head, &a);
	if (head != &c) return false;

	return true;
}
```

In this test we check both cases: removing an element in the middle of the list, and removing the
first element.

We check that the code runs correctly:

```c
printf("result: %s\n", do_test() ? "OK" : "FAIL");
=> result: OK
```

... and it does.

Now we are ready to improve the code.

## Improving code

Walking the list isn't something we can get rid of, but perhaps there's something we can do about
the last check:

```c
if (!prev)
	*head = entry->next;
else
	prev->next = entry->next;
```

In both cases the right-hand side of the assignment is the same: `entry->next`, so an easy
refactoring could be storing the left-hand side which variable, in a variable:

```c
node **tmp;
if (!prev)
	tmp = head;
else
	tmp = &prev->next;
*tmp = entry->next;
```

This code does **exactly** the same as the original, because in the first branch `*tmp` is the same as
`*head`, and in the second branch `*tmp` is `prev->next`.

If we run the test we can verify that's indeed the case.

Now, we know the only time `prev` is going to be `NULL` is when `entry` is the first node, and
therefore the `while` cycle is never run, so we can initialize `tmp` at the same time we initialize
`prev` (at the start):

```c
prev = NULL;
tmp = head;
walk = *head;
```

Now `tmp` only needs to be updated when `prev` has not been updated (not `NULL`):

```c
if (prev) tmp = &prev->next;
```

But if we are going to update `tmp` only when `prev` is updated, perhaps we can update both at the
same time:

```c
while (walk != entry) {
	prev = walk;
	tmp = &prev->next;
	walk = walk->next;
}
```

At this point the resulting code is:

```c
node *prev, *walk, **tmp;

prev = NULL;
tmp = head;
walk = *head;

while (walk != entry) {
	prev = walk;
	tmp = &prev->next;
	walk = walk->next;
}

*tmp = entry->next;
```

Turns out that `prev` isn't used at all any more, so let's get rid of it:

```c
node *walk, **tmp;

tmp = head;
walk = *head;

while (walk != entry) {
	tmp = &walk->next;
	walk = walk->next;
}

*tmp = entry->next;
```

The test still passes, so we are are doing OK.

Next, it's very obvious that `tmp` and `walk` are very similar, in fact `tmp` is simply the address
of `walk`, and `walk` is only used to check if we've reached the target `entry`. So we can use
`*tmp` instead of `walk`:

```c
node **tmp;

tmp = head;

while ((*tmp) != entry) {
	tmp = &(*tmp)->next;
}

*tmp = entry->next;
```

We've reached the exact same code Linus Torvalds considered to be "good taste", all we have to do is
change the name of `tmp` which is an indirect pointer to the pointer we want to update.

And we can simplify the code even more:

```c
node **p = head;
while (*p != entry)
	p = &(*p)->next;
*p = entry->next;
```

This already drives the point home, but that's not all we can do:

```c
node **p;
for (p = head; *p != entry; p = &(*p)->next);
*p = entry->next;
```

All we had to do is consider a pointer to a pointer, and now the code is only two lines and there
are no corner cases.

<canvas id="improved"></canvas>

## Conclusion

As we've seen from this illustration, to a developer with good taste ™ it's not enough for the
code to compile and run correctly, by simply employing a little bit of thought the code can be
improved to the point where the best developers in the world could consider "good".

However, as Linus Torvalds pointed out: this is nothing. This is a very trivial illustration of the
kind of pushback you would receive from good taste developers to perfectly correct code. Real
examples look very different from this.

For starters, in the real world not all linked lists contain a single `int` field, so what would a
**real** linked list look like? For the answer check [part 2](2.html).

<script src="../index.js"></script>

[ted]: https://youtu.be/o8NPllzkFhE?t=858
