We have now two implementations, one good enough for a standalone project, another one good enough
for a library. But we are not done.

Can we do better than GLib?

I've often argued that the gold standard for development is the Linux project (by "Linux" I'm
always referring to the kernel, because that's the name of the project). Every time I've seen a
debate whether of development practices, code-style, tooling, you name it, Linux is doing it right.
And never have I seen a case where another project did better.

Of course this is subjective and a matter of taste, but **taste** is precisely what we are
exploring, so how is Linux approaching this?

## The Linux way

```c
struct llist_head {
	struct llist_node *first;
};

struct llist_node {
	struct llist_node *next;
};
```

Well, that's certainly different.

For starters it's two structures rather than one (I'll explain why later), but more importantly:
there's no `data` pointer. Where are we supposed to put our data?

It turns out that Linux developers know C, and I mean: **really** know C.

What we can do is embed a structure inside another structure, for example:

```c
struct base {
	int id;
	char *name;
};

struct special {
	void *extra;
	struct base base;
};
```

In this case the base structure is inside the special structure, so we can access the members of
`struct base` through the special structure, like this: `x.base.name`.

So we can embed the generic node inside the custom node:

```c
struct node {
	int value;
	struct llist_node node;
};
```

To access the next element of our custom node, we do `x.node.next`. Problem solved.

Not so fast.

The next element is a `struct llist_node *`, not a `struct node *` -- it's the generic node, not the
custom node. So how can we access the value of the next element -- if the value is in the custom
stucture and all we have is a pointer to the next generic structure?

This is where it gets tricky.

If the address of `x.node` is `0x1008` and `node` is at offset 8 in the struct, then `x` is at
`0x1000`. But how can we calculate that programmatically? There's a macro for that: [offsetof].

`offsetof(struct node, node)` gives us 8, so all we have to do is substract that from the address of
the generic node: `&x.node - offsetof(struct node, node) == &x`.

Do we really have to do this calculation? No, linux has a convenient macro:

```c
#define container_of(ptr, type, member) ((type *)((void *)(ptr) - offsetof(type, member)))
```

So we can do `container_of(&x.node, struct node, node)` to get our custom node data. Linux has a
`llist_entry` macro to help us, but that's basically the same thing as `container_of`, and since we
know the specific type of our structure and its member, we can create our own macro:

```c
#define node_entry(ptr) container_of(ptr, struct node, node)
```

So we simply do `node_entry(&x.node)`. Given a generic `struct llist_node` pointer `p`, we can
fetch its corresponding custom value with `node_entry(p)->value`.

Didn't I tell you they **really** know C? [Here][container_of] is a blog post from
Greg Kroah-Hartman explaining the macro.

But we are not done yet. If we rearrange our structure to have the `struct llist_node` on top like
this:

```c
struct node {
	struct llist_node node;
	int value;
};
```

Then `offsetof(struct node, node)` will always be zero, therefore the `container_of` macro is
essentially doing nothing:

```c
#define container_of(ptr, type, member) ((type *)((void *)(ptr) - offsetof(type, member)))
#define container_of(ptr, type, member) ((type *)(ptr))
```

This is just a cast, so a `struct node *` can be treated like a `struct llist_node *`? Yes.

If we have these structures with similar members:

```c
struct base {
	int id;
	char *name;
};

struct special {
	int id;
	char *name;
	void *extra;
};
```

As long as the extra members are stored **after** the base ones, variables of type `struct special`
can be considered `struct base`. So if we have a variable `struct special *x`, these two statements
are equivalent:

```c
x->name
((struct base *)x)->name
```

Why? Because in `struct base` the `name` member is at offset 8, and in `struct special` it's also at
offset 8.

This doesn't change if we completely embed one structure inside the other:

```c
struct special {
	struct base base;
	void *extra;
};
```

Before the member `extra` was at offset 16, and since `sizeof(struct base)` is 16, it still is.

So we can embed the list node structure inside a custom structure, add any elements we want, and it
will still behave as if it was a list node:

```c
struct node {
	struct llist_node node;
	int value;
};
```

So, instead of this:

```c
struct node {
	int value;
	struct llist_node node;
};
#define container_of(ptr, type, member) ((type *)((void *)(ptr) - offsetof(type, member)))
#define node_entry(ptr) container_of(ptr, struct node, node)

node_entry(p)->value
```

We can do this:

```c
struct node {
	struct llist_node node;
	int value;
};

((struct node *)p)->value
```

That's a lot of complexity just to declare a node, and we haven't even created one. How is this
"better"?

Well, in GLib this is how we created a node:

```c
node_data a = { .value = 0 };
GSList link_a = { .data = &a };
```

*Note*: in the real world we would be allocating this memory, so instead of two initializations we
would have two `malloc()`s and therefore subsequently we would need to do two `free()`s.

How do you create a node in the linux version?

```c
struct node a = { .value = 0 };
```

By pushing all the complexity into the library, the users of that library become really simple. The
best programmers in the planet have spent countless hours improving these libraries, it would be
really hard to find any possible area of improvement, this is quite simply: state of the art.

Now it's time to actually do something with these data.

## Delete

In Linux there's multiple implementations of linked lists, and the closest one to our needs is the
lock-less single linked list (`llist`). We are going to ignore the [lock-less part][lockless] part,
and focus the meat of the code.

This is what the code for deleting an element looks like:

```c
```

Actually, there is no code for that.

Because Linux cares **a lot** about performance, if you want to delete a single element inside a
list, a single linked list is simply not the right data structure for it: you want a doubly linked
list. By not providing an implementation for this, linux is forcing you to pick the right data
structure.

But let's pretend that deleting an element inside a single linked list does make sense, what would
that code look like?

This is my best initial attempt:

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	for (p = list->first; p; p = p->next) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

This code looks different than the implementations in part 1 and 2 because now we have two
structures, is that even necessary?

Before making any judgements, let's compare it with the best version we have so far:

```c
GSList *g_slist_remove_link(GSList *list, GSList *link)
{
	GSList **p;

	for (p = &list; *p; p = &(*p)->next) {
		if (*p != link) continue;
		*p = (*p)->next;
		break;
	}

	return list;
}
```

One obvious difference: one version returns a `GSList *` the other one doesn't return anything.

That's because one version is supposed to be called like:

```c
head = g_slist_remove_link(head, &b);
```

While the other:

```c
llist_del(&list, &b);
```

At this point it should be obvious that we are forgetting something.

## Tests

OK, we already explored how to declare nodes, so:

```c
struct node a = { .value = 0 };
struct node b = { .value = 1 };
struct node c = { .value = 2 };
```

To link the nodes:

```c
a.node.next = &b.node;
b.node.next = &c.node;
```

So far nothing particularly special, but we haven't done anything regarding that other structure
`struct llist_head`:

```c
struct llist_head list = { .first = &a.node };
```

Our list is in fact a data structure that contains a pointer to the first node in the list.

OK, but *why*? Couldn't we just have a pointer to the first `struct llist_node`? We'll come back to
that, first let's finish the tests.

```c
// Remove the second node
llist_del(&list, &b.node);
if (a.node.next != &c.node) return false;

// Remove the first node
llist_del(&list, &a.node);
if (list.first != &c.node) return false;

// Remove the first node again
llist_del(&list, &a.node);
if (list.first != &c.node) return false;
```

If we run the tests they fail, so clearly we missed something.

## The head

If we do a little debugging we quickly find out that removing the first node doesn't work.

Let's go back to the code:

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	for (p = list->first; p; p = p->next) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

What happens if we try to remove the first element in the list? Shouldn't `list->first` be updated
in that case?

It turns out that we need an extra check for the special case where we want to remove the first
element:

```c
if (entry == list->first) {
	list->first = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

If we run the tests now they pass. We **finally** have a version that works.

So far it seems this separate `struct head *` is only creating headaches for no gain.

But hold on... Linus Torvalds told us in his TED talk that it's better to avoid special cases, can
we refactor the code to avoid this special case for the first element?

To do that we would need the `for` loop:

```c
for (p = list->first; p; p = p->next) {
	if (p->next != entry) continue;
	p->next = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

To somehow do this as well:

```c
if (entry == list->first) {
	list->first = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

Well, these two lines seem similar:

```c
list->first = entry->next;
p->next     = entry->next;
```

All we need is `list->first` to somehow be equivalent to `p->next`, but not only are the members
different, `list` is a `struct head *` and `p` is a `struct node *`, so it seems we hit a dead end.

But we already saw that in C one structure can pretend to be another structure, so a
`struct llist_head *` can pretend to be a `struct llist_node *`, as long as the first members of the
structures are equivalent, but are they?

```c
struct llist_head {
	struct llist_node *first;
};

struct llist_node {
	struct llist_node *next;
};
```

Actually, the first member of both structures is a `struct llist_node *`, the only difference is the
name.

So in theory this is true:

```c
&p->next == &list->first
```

Then all we need to do is pretend that `(struct llist_node *)p == (struct llist_head *)list`.

So this:

```c
if (entry == list->first) {
	list->first = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

Becomes this:

```c
p = (struct llist_node *)list;
if (entry == p->next) {
	p->next = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

Now the code is doing something very similar to what the `for` loop is doing:

```c
for (p = list->first; p; p = p->next) {
	if (p->next != entry) continue;
	p->next = entry->next;
	return;
}
```

In both cases `p->next` is compared with `entry`, and if they are equal, then `p->next` is updated
with `entry->next`.

The difference is that the loop starts with `list->first`, and then continues with `p->next` in the
negative case. The special check starts with `list` and does not continue.

We can pretend `list` is a node pointer, then the code in the `for` loop will do the
same as above in the affirmative, and go to `p->next` in the negative, which is the same as
`list->first`, thus continuing with the behavior of the original loop.

So all we need to do is start with `list` instead of `list->first` (and cast it):

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	for (p = (struct llist_node *)list; p; p = p->next) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

Believe it or not, this does **exactly** the same thing as this:

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	if (entry == list->first) {
		list->first = entry->next;
		return;
	}

	for (p = list->first; p; p = p->next) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

Another way to think about this is that `struct llist_head` is a fake first node in the list, a node
that can never be removed and points to the actual first node.

<canvas id="linux"></canvas>

Good bye special case.

Now we are starting to see the usefulness of a separate structure for the head of the list.

## What about GLib?

OK, so a separate list head seems to be useful, but why doesn't GLib do this?

Let's comapre the two versions:

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	for (p = (struct llist_node *)list; p; p = p->next) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

```c
GSList *g_slist_remove_link(GSList *list, GSList *link)
{
	GSList **p;

	for (p = &list; *p; p = &(*p)->next) {
		if (*p != link) continue;
		*p = (*p)->next;
		break;
	}

	return list;
}
```

The **only** reason GLib is updating the first `GSList *` is in the special case that we want to
remove the first node.

If we followed the linux way, the head would be the first node, the `head->next` would be updated and
there's no need to return anything. And because we are always updating a `p->next` pointer, there's
no need for an indirect pointer, and the code becomes simpler.

Additionally, by having a separate structure for the head the compiler can check for mistakes
itself (in case the user passes a node instead of a head).

The linux way is much better, but that's not all.

Linux has macros to work with these lists, and there's one to traverse it:

```c
#define llist_for_each(pos, node) for ((pos) = (node); pos; (pos) = (pos)->next)
```

If we use it, the code becomes even simpler:

```c
void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	llist_for_each(p, (struct llist_node *)list) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

So the real reason why GLib developers didn't do this clearly superior approach is simply that they
didn't think of it.

## Conclusion

So we went from this:

```c
typedef struct node {
	int value;
	struct node *next;
} node;

void remove_list_entry(node **head, node *entry)
{
	node *prev, *walk;

	prev = NULL;
	walk = *head;

	// Walk the list

	while (walk != entry) {
		prev = walk;
		walk = walk->next;
	}

	// Remove the entry by updating the
	// head or the previous entry

	if (!prev)
		*head = entry->next;
	else
		prev->next = entry->next;
}
```

To this:

```c
struct llist_head {
	struct llist_node *first;
};

struct llist_node {
	struct llist_node *next;
};

struct node {
	struct llist_node node;
	int value;
};

#define llist_for_each(pos, node) for ((pos) = (node); pos; (pos) = (pos)->next)

void llist_del(struct llist_head *list, struct llist_node *entry)
{
	struct llist_node *p;

	llist_for_each(p, (struct llist_node *)list) {
		if (p->next != entry) continue;
		p->next = entry->next;
		return;
	}
}
```

Which is superior to what one of the most widely used libraries (GLib) is doing, and we can be
relatively certain that if there any possible improvements, they are very likely few.

By thinking a bit more about data structures we ended up with code that even the best programmers in
the world would approve of.

This is good taste.

<script src="../index.js"></script>

[offsetof]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Offsetof
[container_of]: http://www.kroah.com/log/linux/container_of.html
[lockless]: https://lwn.net/Articles/844224/
